The Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 754: The Bedbug
(1916), by Charles Lester Marlatt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 754: The Bedbug (1916)

Author: Charles Lester Marlatt

Release Date: September 18, 2020 [EBook #63225]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas from files generously made available
by USDA through The Internet Archive. All resultant
materials are placed in the Public Domain.










Transcriber Note

Text emphasis denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=.


  +-------------------------------------------------------+
  |        UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE        |
  |                                                       |
  |[Illustration]        =FARMERS'        [Illustration]  |
  |                       BULLETIN=                       |
  |                                                       |
  +-------------------------------------------------------+
  Washington, D. C.          754           October 14, 1916
  ---------------------------------------------------------
         =Contribution from the Bureau of Entomology,
                    L. O. Howard, Chief.=




                       =THE BEDBUG.=[1]


                      By C. L. Marlatt,

          _Entomologist and Assistant Chief of Bureau_.

[1] _Cimex lectularius_ L.; order Hemiptera, suborder Heteroptera,
family Cimicidae.



=CONTENTS.=


                                        Page.

  Introduction                               1

  Origin; common names; distribution         2

  Varieties and related insects              3

  General characteristics                    3

  The "buggy" odor                           4

  Habits and life history                    4

  Food and longevity                         7

  Influence of temperature                   8

  The bite of the bedbug                     9

  The bedbug and human diseases              9

  Natural enemies of the bedbug             10

  Remedies                                  11




=INTRODUCTION.=


The presence of the bedbug (fig. 1) in a house is not necessarily an
indication of neglect or carelessness; for, little as the idea may be
relished, this insect may gain access in spite of the adoption of all
reasonable precautions. It is very apt to get into the trunks and satchels
of travelers, or into baskets of laundry, and may thus be introduced into
homes. Unfortunately, also, it is quite capable of migrating from one
house to another and will often continue to come from an adjoining house,
sometimes for a period of several months, gaining entrance daily. Such
migration is especially likely to take place if the human inhabitants of
an infested house leave it. With the failure of their usual source of
food, the migratory instinct of the bedbugs is developed, and, escaping
through windows, they pass along walls, water pipes, or gutters, and thus
gain entrance into adjoining houses. In these or other ways anyone's
premises may be temporarily invaded.




=ORIGIN; COMMON NAMES: DISTRIBUTION.=


As with nearly all the insects associated with man, the bedbug has had the
habits now characteristic of it as far back as the records run. It was
undoubtedly of common occurrence in the dwellings of the ancient peoples
of Asia. The Romans were well acquainted with it, giving it the name
Cimex. It was supposed by Pliny--and this was doubtless the common belief
among the Romans--to have medicinal properties, and it was recommended,
among other things, as a specific for the bites of serpents. It is said to
have been first introduced into England in 1503, but the references to it
are of such a nature as to make it very probable that it had been there
long before. Two hundred and fifty years later it was reported to be very
abundant in the seaport towns, but was scarcely known inland.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Bedbug (_Cimex lectularius_): _a_, Adult female,
engorged with blood; _b_, same from below; _c_, rudimentary wing pad; _d_,
mouth parts, _a, b_, much enlarged; _c, d_, highly magnified. (Author's
illustration.)]

One of the old English names was "wall-louse." It was afterward very
well known as the "chinch," which continued to be the common appellation
for it until within a century or two, and is still used in parts of this
country. The origin of the name "bedbug" is not known, but it is such a
descriptive one that it would seem to have been very naturally suggested.
Almost everywhere there are local names for these parasites, as, for
illustration, around Boston they are called "chintzes" and "chinches," and
from Baltimore comes the name "mahogany flat," while in New York they are
styled "red coats," and in the west "crimson ramblers."

The bedbug has accompanied man wherever he has gone. Ships are very
apt to be infested with it and have been the chief means of its wide
distribution. It probably came to this country with the earliest
colonists; at least Kalm, writing in 1748-49, stated that it was plentiful
in the English colonies and in Canada, though unknown among the Indians.




=VARIETIES AND RELATED INSECTS.=


What may eventually prove to be mere variations of the ordinary-type of
human bedbug have been described as distinct species in several instances.
For example, the common bedbug of southern Asia is supposed to present
some slight variations from the European type, chiefly in being somewhat
more elongate. These slightly diverging forms of the bedbug in different
parts of the world, which are not known to have any special bird or animal
host other than human beings, may prove to be merely local races or
varieties of the ordinary bedbug.

Birds, bats, and poultry are attacked in various parts of the world by
a considerable number of parasitic bugs, closely related to the bedbug,
which live on their hosts and in nests and about roosting places. One of
these species, occurring abundantly in southwestern United States and
Mexico,[2] probably originally a parasitic messmate on birds and bats, has
come to be an unmitigated poultry pest, and from the close association in
these regions between poultry and human beings, is often a serious house
pest--more so even than the true bedbug. Others of the species infesting
birds and bats may also on occasion become house pests. For example, the
nests of the common barn or eaves swallow of this country often swarm with
the barn-swallow bug,[3] and from such nests under the eaves of dwelling
houses these bugs sometimes gain entrance to houses and beds and are the
cause of much annoyance. Similarly a species,[4] normally a parasite of
birds and bats in the Old World, and also in Brazil and the West Indies,
not infrequently becomes a human parasite.

[2] (_Cimex_) _Haematosiphon inodora_ Dugès.

[3] (_Cimex_) _Oeciacus hirundinis_ Jenyns.

[4] _Cimex hemipterus_ Fab. (synonym, _rotundatus_ Sign.).




=GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS.=


The bedbug belongs to the order Hemiptera, which includes the true bugs or
piercing insects, characterized by possessing a piercing and sucking beak.
The bedbug is to man what the chinch bug is to grains or the squash bug
to cucurbs. Like nearly all the insects parasitic on animals, however, it
is degraded structurally, its parasitic nature and the slight necessity
for extensive locomotion having resulted, after many ages doubtless, in
the loss of wings and the assumption of a comparatively simple structure.
Before feeding, the adult (fig. 2) is much flattened, oval, and in
color is rust red, with the abdomen more or less tinged with black.
When engorged the body becomes much bloated and elongated and brightly
colored from the ingested blood. The wings are represented by the merest
rudiments, barely recognizable pads, and the simple eyes or ocelli of
most other true bugs are lacking. The absence of wings is a most fortunate
circumstance, since otherwise there would be no safety from it even for
the most careful of housekeepers. Some slight variation in length of wing
pads has been observed, but none with wings showing any considerable
development has ever been found.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Bedbug: Adult before engorgement. Much enlarged.
(Author's illustration.)]




=THE "BUGGY" ODOR.=


The most characteristic feature of the bedbug is the very distinct and
disagreeable odor which it exhales, an odor well known to all who have
been familiar with it as the "buggy" odor. This odor is by no means
limited to the bedbug, but is characteristic of most plant bugs also. The
common chinch bug affecting small grains and the squash bugs all possess
this odor, and it is quite as pungent with these plant-feeding forms as
with the human parasite. The possession of this odor, disagreeable as
it is, is very fortunate after all, as it is of considerable assistance
in detecting the presence of these vermin. The odor comes from glands,
situated in various parts of the body, which secrete a clear, oily,
volatile liquid. With the plant-feeding forms this odor is certainly a
means of protection against insectivorous birds, rendering these insects
obnoxious or distasteful to their feathered enemies. With the bedbug, on
the other hand, it is probably an illustration of a very common phenomenon
among animals, i. e., the persistence of a characteristic which is no
longer of any especial value to the possessor. The natural enemies of true
bugs, against which this odor senses as a moans of protection, in the
conditions under which the bedbug lives, are kept away from it; and the
roach, which sometimes feeds on bedbugs, is evidently not deterred by the
odor, while the common house ant and the house centipede, which may also
attack the bedbug, seem not to find this odor disagreeable.




=HABITS AND LIFE HISTORY.=


The bedbug is normally nocturnal in habits and displays a certain degree
of wariness, caution, and intelligence in its efforts at concealment
during the day. Under the stress of hunger, however, it will emerge
from its place of concealment in a well-lighted room at night, so that
under such circumstances keeping the gas or electric light burning is
not a complete protection. It has been known under similar conditions to
attack human beings voraciously in broad daylight. It usually leaves its
victim as soon as it has become engorged with blood and retires to its
normal place of concealment, either in cracks in the bedstead, especially
if the latter be one of the wooden variety, or behind wainscoting, or
under loose wall paper, and in these and similar places it manifests its
gregarious habit by collecting in masses. It thrives particularly in
filthy apartments and in old houses which are full of cracks and crevices,
in which it can conceal itself beyond easy reach. As just noted the
old-fashioned, heavy, wooden-slatted bedsteads afford especially favorable
situations for the concealment and multiplication of this insect, and the
general use in later years of iron and brass bedsteads has very greatly
facilitated its eradication. Such beds, however, do not insure safety, as
the insects are able to find places of concealment even about such beds,
or get to them readily from their other hiding places.

Extraordinary stories are current of the remarkable intelligence of this
insect in circumventing various efforts to prevent its gaining access
to beds. Most of these are undoubtedly exaggerations, but the inherited
experience of many centuries of companionship with man, during which
the bedbug has always found its host an active enemy, has resulted in a
knowledge of the habits of the human animal and a facility of concealment,
particularly as evidenced by its abandoning beds and often going to
distant quarters for protection and hiding during daylight, which indicate
considerable apparent intelligence.

Like its allies, the bedbug undergoes what is known as an incomplete
metamorphosis. In other words, the insect from its larval to its adult
stage is active and similar in form, structure, and habit, contrasting
with flies and moths in their very diverse life stages of larva,
chrysalis, or pupa, and winged adult.

The eggs (fig. 3, _d_) are white oval objects having a little projecting
rim around one edge and may be found in batches of from 6 to 50 in cracks
and crevices where the parent bugs go for concealment. In confinement eggs
may be deposited almost daily over a period of two months or more and
commonly at the rate of from one to live eggs per day, but sometimes much
larger batches are laid. As many as 190 eggs have been thus obtained from
a single captured female.[5]

[5] Girault, A. A. Preliminary studies on the biology of the bedbug,
_Cimex lectularius_, Linn. III. Facts obtained concerning the habits of
the adult. _In_ Jour. Econ. Biol., v. 9, no. 1, p. 25-45. 1914.

The eggs hatch in a week or 10 days in the hot weather of mid-summer, but
cold may lengthen or even double this egg period or check development
altogether. The young escape by pushing up the lid-like top with its
projecting rim. When first emerged (fig. 3, _a, b_) they are yellowish
white and nearly transparent, the brown color of the more mature insect
increasing with the later molts (fig. 4).

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Bedbug: Egg and newly hatched larva: _a_, Larva
from below; _b_, larva from above; _c_, claw; _d_, egg; _c_, hair or spine
of larva. Greatly enlarged, natural size of larva and egg indicated by
hair lines. (Author's illustration.)]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Bedbug: _a_, Larval skin shed at first molt;
_b_, second larval stage immediately after emerging from _a_; _c_, same
after first meal, distended with blood. Greatly enlarged. (Author's
illustration.)]

During the course of its development the bedbug molts or sheds its
skin normally five times, and with the last molt the minute wing pads,
characteristic of the adult insect, make their appearance. A period of
about 11 weeks was formerly supposed to be necessary for the complete
maturity of the insect, but breeding experiments with this insect,
conducted in this department in 1896, indicated that the life cycle is
subject to great variation, being entirely dependent on warmth and food
supply. Under favorable conditions of temperature and food it was found
that there was an average period of about eight days between moltings
and between the laying of eggs and their hatching, giving about seven
weeks as the period under these conditions from egg to adult insect. The
molting periods are shorter in the earlier stages and lengthen in the
later stages. There are many exceptions, however, and some individuals
even under the same conditions remain two or three weeks without molting.
Under conditions of famine, or without food, as already shown, the bedbug
may remain unchanged in any of the immature stages for an indefinite
time, and the checking of development by such starvation may result in
additional molting periods.

The breeding records referred to, and numerous confirmatory experiments
subsequently made by other investigators, indicate that ordinarily but one
meal is taken between molts, so that each bedbug must puncture its host
five times before becoming mature, and at least once afterwards before
it can develop eggs. Additional meals between molts may be taken under
favoring circumstances, however, and particularly when the insect has been
disturbed and has not become fully engorged at its first meal after a
molting or other period. The bedbug takes from 5 to 10 minutes to become
bloated with blood, and then retires to its place of concealment for 6 to
10 days for the quiet digestion of its enormous meal, and for subsequent
molting, or reproduction if in the adult stage.

Such feeding and reproduction may, under favorable conditions of
temperature, continue throughout the year, and in one instance the
progeny of a captured female adult was carried through three continuous
generations.[6]

[6] Girault, A. A. Preliminary studies on the biology of the bedbug,
_Cimex lectularius_, Linn. II. Facts obtained concerning the duration of
its different stages. _In_ Jour. Econ. Biol., v. 7, no. 4, p. 163-188.
1912.

Unfavorable conditions of temperature and food will necessarily result in
great variation in the number of generations annually and in the rate of
multiplication, but allowing for reasonable checks on development, there
may be at least four successive broods in a year in houses kept well
heated in winter.




=FOOD AND LONGEVITY.=


Under normal conditions the food of the common bedbug is obtained from
human beings only, and no other unforced feeding habit has been reported.
It is easily possible, however, to force the bedbug to feed on mice, rats,
birds, etc., and probably it may do so occasionally in nature in the
absence of its normal host. The abundance of this insect in houses which
have long been untenanted may occasionally be accounted for by such other
sources of food, but probably normally such infestation can be explained
by the natural longevity of the insect and its ability to survive for
practically a year, and perhaps more, without food.

There are many records indicating the ability of the bedbug to survive
for long periods without food, and specimens have been kept for a year
in a sealed vial with absolutely no means of sustenance whatever. In the
course of the department's study of this insect in 1896, young bedbugs,
obtained from eggs, were kept in small sealed vials for several months,
remaining active in spite of the fact that they had never taken any
nourishment whatever. A considerable series of experiments was later
conducted by Girault[7] bearing on the longevity of the insect under
different conditions. A large number of adults of both sexes were kept
in confinement, but with normal feeding and mating, and these survived
for periods ranging from 54 to 316 days. Similarly, the life of 71 newly
hatched larvæ, without food, ranged from 17 to 42 days, averaging about 28
days. Partly grown captured insects lived without further feeding from 17
to 60 days. Longevity is naturally affected more or less by temperatures.
In other words, temperatures sufficient to check the activity of the
insect and produce hibernation or semihibernation are apt to increase
longevity.

[7] Loc. cit.

The fact that the bedbug is able to survive for such long periods without
human blood has led to the theory that it could subsist in some fashion
on the moisture from wood or from accumulations of dust in crevices in
flooring, etc. There seems to be no basis of observed fact for this idea.

Another very prevalent belief among the old settlers in the West, that
this insect normally lives on dead or diseased cottonwood logs, and is
almost certain to abound in log houses of this wood, seems to be equally
devoid of basis. As illustrating this belief, the department has on
file a very definite report from an Army officer that the bedbug often
occurs in numbers under the bark of dead cottonwood trees,[8] especially
along the Big Horn and Little Horn Rivers in Montana. The basis of this
report and the origin of this very general misconception is probably, as
pointed out by the late Prof. Riley, due to a confusion of the bedbug with
the immature stages of an entirely distinct insect,[9] which somewhat
resembles the bedbug and often occurs under cottonwood bark.

[8] _Populus monilifera._

[9] _Aradus_ sp.




=INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE.=


As a messmate of human beings in dwelling houses, the bedbug is normally
protected from extreme cold, and is known to be an abundant and serious
pest far north. In fact, it is often more troublesome in north temperate
latitudes than farther south. This may be accounted for partly by the fact
that the bedbug is very sensitive to high temperatures, and a temperature
of 96° to 100° F. or more, accompanied with a fairly high degree of
humidity, results in the death of large numbers of the bugs. The mature
or partly mature bedbugs can stand comparatively low temperatures, even
below freezing, for a considerable period. The eggs and newly hatched
larvæ, however, succumb to a temperature below freezing, if this condition
is prolonged for from 15 days to a month. The feeding and developing
activity of the insect practically ceases at 60° F., the insect remaining
quiescent and in semihibernation at temperatures below this point. The
most favorable temperatures for activity are between 60° and 98° F.[10]
The activity of the insect is controlled entirely by temperature and food
supply, and, therefore, in heated houses the insect may remain active
throughout the winter. There is some protection in winter, therefore, in
sleeping in cold bedrooms.

[10] Bacot, A. W. The influence of temperature, submersion, and burial
on the survival of eggs and larvæ of _Cimex lectularius_. _In_ Bul. Ent.
Res., v. 5, pt. 2, p. 111-117. 1914.




=THE BITE OF THE BEDBUG.=


The bite of the bedbug is decidedly poisonous to some individuals,
resulting in a slight swelling and disagreeable inflammation. To such
persons the presence of bedbugs is sufficient to cause the greatest
uneasiness, if not to put sleep and rest entirely out of the question.
With others, however, who are less sensitive, the presence of the bugs
may not be recognized at all, and, except for the occasional staining
of the linen by a crushed individual, their presence might be entirely
overlooked. The inflammation experienced by sensitive persons seems to
result chiefly from the puncture of the skin by the sharp piercing setæ
which constitute the puncturing element of the mouth parts, as there seems
to be no secretion of poison other than the natural fluids of the mouth.

The biting organ of the bedbug is similar to that of other insects of its
order. It consists of a rather heavy, fleshy under lip (the only part
ordinarily seen in examining the insect), within which lie four threadlike
hard filaments or setæ which glide over one another with an alternating
motion and pierce the flesh. The blood is drawn up through the beak, which
is closely applied to the point of puncture, and the alternating motion of
the setæ in the flesh causes the blood to flow more freely. The details of
the structure of the beak are shown in figure 1 at _d_.

To allay the irritation set up by the bite of the bedbug, peroxide of
hydrogen, or dioxygen, may be used with good results.

Tincture of iodine either at ordinary or double strength is also a good
counter-irritant for use in cases of flea, mosquito, bedbug, and other
insect bites, but should be used with caution on the tender skin of
small children and on those who are affected with or disposed to eczemic
disorders.




=THE BEDBUG AND HUMAN DISEASES.=


In common with other insects which attack man and warm-blooded animals,
it is entirely possible for the bedbug and its close allies to be
transmitters of contagious human diseases, and already these insects have
been shown to be possible carriers or transmitters of a considerable
series of diseases, including infantile Kala-azar of northern Africa and
southern Europe, relapsing fever of Africa and Europe, the Chagas fever
of Brazil, tropical sore, plague, and possibly leprosy. In the case of
these, and perhaps other diseases, the bedbug shares the responsibility of
transmitter with other biting insects, such as body lice and fleas.

The particular role of the bedbug as a carrier of disease has not been
satisfactorily determined, nor has it been shown that the bedbug is a
necessary alternate host in any instance. In general, the transmission
of disease by this insect has apparently resulted from the accidental
carriage of the disease elements on the mouth parts, as pointed out by
André,[11] after a careful study of the subject. As a parasite of human
beings in private dwelling houses, where it may seldom change its host,
the opportunity for the bedbug itself to become infected with human
diseases and again to transmit them to the human subject is very remote.
This condition, however, does not apply to hotels or to passenger boats,
where the human occupants are constantly changing. Furthermore, the fact
that the bedbug attacks its host at comparatively long intervals of from
a week to several weeks or months acts as a bar to its transmission of
certain insect-borne diseases, the biology of which requires a definite
and comparatively short period of development in the alternate insect host.

[11] André, Ch. Recherches anatomiques et expérimentales sur la punaise
des lits. _In_ Jour. Physiol. et Path. Gén., v. 14, p. 600-615. 1912.




=NATURAL ENEMIES OF THE BEDBUG.=


Living always in houses as it does and being well concealed, the bedbug
is not normally subject to much if any control by natural enemies.
Certain other household insects, however, do occasionally prey upon the
bedbug, as, for example, the house centipede[12] and the common little
red house ant.[13] Such enemies, however, are of very small importance
and yield little, if any, effective control except under very exceptional
circumstances. One such instance is reported by the late Mr. Theodore
Pergande, of this department, who states that as a soldier in the Civil
War he occupied at one time a barracks at Meridian, Miss., which had
been abandoned some time before. The premises proved to be swarming with
bedbugs; but very shortly afterwards the little red house ant discovered
the presence of the bedbugs and came in enormous numbers, and Mr. Pergande
witnessed the very interesting and pleasing sight of the bedbugs being
dismembered and carried away bodily by these very minute ants, many times
smaller than the bugs which they were handling so successfully. The result
was that in a single day the bedbug nuisance was completely abated. The
liking of red ants for bedbugs is confirmed also by a correspondent
writing from Florida (F. C. M. Boggess), who goes so far as heartily to
recommend the artificial introduction of the ants to abate this bug
nuisance.[14] Bedbugs and other household insects, however, are not of the
sort which it is convenient or profitable to turn over to their natural
enemies in the hope that eradication by this means will follow, and the
fact that they are preyed upon by other insects furnishes no excuse to the
housekeeper for not instituting prompt remedial measures.

[12] _Scutigera forceps_ Raf.

[13] _Monomorium pharaonis_ L.

[14] Bedbugs and red ants, _In_ Insect Life, v. 6, no. 4, p. 340. 1894.




=REMEDIES.=


Undoubtedly the most efficient remedy for the bedbug is to fumigate the
infested house or rooms with hydrocyanic-acid gas. This gas will penetrate
into every crevice in the house or room where the bedbugs conceal
themselves and has an immediate effectiveness which gives it an important
recommendation, especially when the infestation is considerable or of long
standing. This method of fumigation should be intelligently employed,
as the gas is deadly poisonous. A bulletin giving directions for such
fumigation has been issued by the Department of Agriculture.[15]

[15] Howard, L. O., and Popenoe, C. H. Hydrocyanic-acid gas against
household insects. U. S. Dept. Agr. Farmers' Bul. 699. 8 p. 1916.

The fumes of burning sulphur are also a very efficient means of control
where the conditions are such that this method can be used, readily
destroying the insect in all stages, including the egg. The treatment is
inexpensive compared with the use of hydrocyanic-acid gas and offers much
less risk of danger to human beings. There is, however, a considerable
risk of injury to household fabrics, furnishings, and wall papers from the
strong bleaching quality of sulphur fumes. This danger will be somewhat
diminished if the fumigation can be done at a time when the room or house
is thoroughly dried out, as in winter by a furnace or other heating
system. Further precautions should be taken by removing all metallic
surfaces from the room or building, or by protecting them with a coating
of vaseline. Two pounds of sulphur are recommended for each 2,000 cubic
feet of space, and the building should be closed for the treatment for at
least 5 or 6 hours, or preferably for 24 hours. Sulphur candles may be
used where available, or the sulphurous gas or fumes can be generated by
burning the sulphur in a dish placed in the center of the room, and for
protection set within a larger vessel. Thorough-going precautions must be
taken to prevent accidental overflowing or the starting of a fire, and
after the fumigation the house should be given a thorough airing.

Other gases have been experimented with, such as formalin and the vapors
of benzine, naphthaline, and camphor, but these gases are of little value.
Similarly, insect powders are of little value, largely from the difficulty
of getting them into the crevices and other places of concealment of the
insects.

The old-fashioned household remedies referred to below are effective
enough, though at a greater cost of time and personal effort. They
will, however, be often of much service in the case of slight or recent
infestations, or where the employment of more poisonous and troublesome
gases is objected to or is impracticable. Of these simple methods of
control perhaps the most efficient is in very liberal applications
of benzine or kerosene, or any other of the lighter petroleum oils,
introduced with small brushes or feathers, or by injecting with syringes
into all crevices of beds, furniture, or walls where the insects may have
concealed themselves. Corrosive sublimate is also of value, and oil of
turpentine may be used in the same way. The liberal use of hot water,
wherever it may be employed without danger to furniture, etc., is also an
effectual method of destroying both eggs and active bugs.[16]

[16] A remedy for the bedbug has been devised by Mr. R. H. Pettit
("Notes on two insecticidal agents," in 10th Rpt. Mich. Acad. Sci., p.
159-160, 1908) as a substitute for hydrocyanic-acid gas and sulphur,
and is reported to have proved very successful. The preparation of this
insecticide and its application is described as follows:

  Alcohol is drawn through pyrethrum in a funnel until the powder is
  well washed and a large part of the resinous principle extracted. To
  do this, the powder is placed in a large funnel with filter-plate and
  a layer of cotton wool at the bottom. An aspirator is attached and
  the alcohol is at first slowly and later rapidly sucked through six
  or eight times, during which operation it becomes highly colored. To
  this liquid as a basis, are added several oils to give permanence
  to the application. Both alcohol and pyrethrum evaporate so quickly
  that it was thought best to carry in some heavier volatile oils whose
  effects would last several days or even weeks. The formula when
  completed stands as follows:

  To the extract made by washing 400 grams of pyrethrum with 2,000 c.
  c. of strong alcohol, are added--

      50 grams gum camphor.
      150 c. c. cedar wood oil.
      25 grams oil citronella.
      25 grams oil lavender.

  The application is best made with a large sized atomizer, one holding
  a pint or more and working with a piston instead of a rubber bulb.
  * * * To obtain the best results, repeat the treatment after about
  two weeks. We have tried this mixture repeatedly, and with uniformly
  gratifying results. Usually one application, if thoroughly made, put
  a period to the complaints, about eight or ten ounces being required
  in an average sleeping-room. The odor remains some little time in a
  room, but is not disagreeable to the average person.

  This remedy can be readily prepared by a pharmacist in any drug store.

Various bedbug remedies and mixtures are for sale, most of them containing
one or another of the ingredients mentioned, and these are frequently of
value. The great desideratum, however, in a case of this kind, is a daily
inspection of beds and bedding, particularly the seams and tufting of
mattresses, and of all crevices and locations about the premises where
these vermin may have gone for concealment. A vigorous campaign should, in
the course of a week or so at the outside, result in the extermination of
this very obnoxious and embarrassing pest.

The possibility of temperature control is indicated in the discussion
elsewhere of the effect of temperature on this insect, and it may be that
if infested houses in cold climates could be opened up and allowed to
remain at a temperature well below freezing for a week or more, the bedbug
would be thoroughly exterminated. This method of control would be rarely
practicable except perhaps in the case of summer houses which are left
untenanted in winter.


       *       *       *       *       *


=Transcriber Note=

Illustrations move to prevent splitting paragraphs. Minor typos may have
been corrected. Produced from files generously made available by USDA
through The Internet Archive. All resultant materials are placed in the
Public Domain.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of USDA Farmers' Bulletin No. 754: The
Bedbug (1916), by Charles Lester Marlatt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK USDA FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. ***

***** This file should be named 63225-8.txt or 63225-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/2/2/63225/

Produced by Tom Cosmas from files generously made available
by USDA through The Internet Archive. All resultant
materials are placed in the Public Domain.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
